## 1.4 — Variable assignment and initialization


In the previous lesson (`1.3 -- Introduction to variables`), we covered how to define a variable that we can use to store values. In this lesson, we’ll explore how to actually put values into variables and use those values.

As a reminder, here’s a short snippet that first allocates a single integer variable named x, then allocates two more integer variables named y and z:

```c++
int x; // define an integer variable named x
int y, z; // define two integer variables, named y and z
```

---

**Variable assignment**

After a variable has been defined, you can give it a value (in a separate statement) using the `=` operator. This process is called `copy assignment` (or just `assignment`) for short.

```c++
int width; // define an integer variable named width
width = 5; // copy assignment of value 5 into variable width
 
// variable width now has value 5
```

Copy assignment is named such because it copies the value on the right-hand side of the = operator to the variable on the left-hand side of the operator. The = operator is called the `assignment operator`.

Here’s an example where we use assignment twice:

```c++
#include <iostream>
 
int main()
{
	int width;
	width = 5; // copy assignment of value 5 into variable width
 
	// variable width now has value 5
 
	width = 7; // change value stored in variable width to 7
 
	// variable width now has value 7
 
	return 0;
}
```

When we assign value 7 to variable `width`, the value 5 that was there previously is overwritten. 
Normal variables can only hold one value at a time.

---

**Copy and direct initialization**

One downside of assignment is that it requires at least two statements: 
one to define the variable, and one to assign the value.

These two steps can be combined. When a variable is defined, you can also provide an initial value for the variable at the same time. This is called initialization.

C++ supports three basic ways to initialize a variable. First, we can do `copy initialization` by using an equals sign:

```c++
int width = 5; // copy initialization of value 5 into variable width
```

Much like copy assignment, this copies the value on the right-hand side of the equals to the variable being created on the left-hand side.

Second, we can do a `direct initialization` by using parenthesis.

```c++
int width( 5 ); // direct initialization of value 5 into variable width
```

For simple data types (like integers), copy and direct initialization are essentially the same. But for some advanced types, direct initialization can perform better than copy initialization. Prior to C++11, direct initialization was recommended over copy initialization in most cases because of the performance boost.

---

**Uniform initialization in C++11**

Unfortunately, direct initialization can’t be used for all types of initialization. 
In an attempt to provide a more consistent initialization mechanism, C++11 added a new syntax for direct initialization called `brace initialization` (also called `uniform initialization`) that uses curly braces:

```c++
int width{ 5 }; // brace (uniform) initialization of value 5 into variable width
```

Initializing a variable with empty braces indicates zero initialization. 
`Zero initialization` generally initializes the variable to zero (or empty, if that’s more appropriate for a given type).

```c++
int width{}; // zero initialization to value 0
```

Uniform initialization has the added benefit of disallowing “narrowing” conversions. This means that if you try to use uniform initialization to initialize a variable with a value it can not safely hold, the compiler will throw an warning or error. For example:

```c++
int width{ 4.5 }; // error: an integer variable can not hold a non-integer value
```

In the above snippet, we’re trying to assign a number that has a fractional component to an integer variable (that can not hold a fractional component). 
`Copy` and `direct initialization` would drop the fractional component, resulting in initialization of value 4 into variable width. 
However, with `uniform initialization`, this will cause the compiler to issue an error (which is generally a good thing, because losing data is rarely desired).


---

**Initializing multiple variables**

In the last section, we noted that it is possible to define multiple variables of the same type in a single statement by separating the names with a comma:

```c++
int a, b;
```

We also noted that best practice is to avoid this syntax altogether. However, since you may encounter other code that uses this style, it’s still useful to talk a little bit more about it, if for no other reason than to reinforce some of the reasons you should be avoiding it.

You can initialize multiple variables defined on the same line:

```c++
int a = 5, b = 6; // copy initialization
int c( 7 ), d( 8 ); // direct initialization
int e{ 9 }, f{ 10 }; // uniform initialization (preferred)
```

Unfortunately, there’s a common pitfall here that can occur when the programmer mistakenly tries to initialize both variables by using one initialization statement:

```c++

int a, b = 5; // wrong (a is not initialized!)
 
int a = 5, b = 5; // correct
```


In the top statement, variable “a” will be left uninitialized, and the compiler may or may not complain. If it doesn’t, this is a great way to have your program intermittently crash and produce sporadic results. We’ll talk more about what happens if you use uninitialized variables shortly.

The best way to remember that this is wrong is to consider the case of direct initialization or uniform initialization:

```c++
int a, b( 5 );
int c, d{ 5 };
```

This makes it seem a little more clear that the value 5 is only being used to initialize variable b or d, not a or c.

---

Quiz

> TBD



